README.md, before:

# Changelog Transcripts

The repository of [Changelog](https://changelog.com) episode transcripts in Markdown format.

## Conventions

Parsed and html-ized versions of these transcripts live on [Changelog.com](https://changelog.com) alongside their respective episode, which is accomplished by following this naming convention:

`[podcast-slug]/[hyphenized-podcast-name]-[episode-slug].md`

For example, [the episode that lives at](https://changelog.com/rfc/13): `https://changelog.com/rfc/13`

Has [its transcript in this repo at](https://github.com/thechangelog/transcripts/rfc/request-for-commits-13.md): `rfc/request-for-commits-13.md`

## Contributing

Pull requests, please! Our transcriptions are lovingly crafted by a human, but they're nowhere near perfect. Specific things we'd love help with:

- Replacing the keyword 'unintelligible' with the correct word/phrase
- Adding links to referenced URLs, projects, etc.
- Adding timestamps to key/beloved statements and sections
- Fixing typos

**Why Contributing Is Worth Your Time**

1. Once merged, your contribution will immediately (pending webhook execution) appear on the episode page for all to use/enjoy!
2. We routinely send thank you's on the air and on Twitter!
3. Give back to the awesome [Changelog Community](https://changelog.com/community) of hackers, podcast hosts, and guests!

## Conduct

[Contributor Code of Conduct](https://changelog.com/coc). By participating in this project you agree to abide by its terms.

## License & Copyright

[Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/). Copyright Changelog Media LLC.

Commit message:

add timestamp convention to readme, put contributing first

README.md, after:

# Changelog Transcripts

The repository of [Changelog](https://changelog.com) episode transcripts in Markdown format.

## Contributing

Pull requests, please! Our transcriptions are lovingly crafted by a human, but they're nowhere near perfect. Specific things we'd love help with:

- Replacing the keyword 'unintelligible' with the correct word/phrase
- Adding links to referenced URLs, projects, etc.
- Adding timestamps to key/beloved statements and sections
- Fixing typos

**Why Contributing Is Worth Your Time**

1. Once merged, your contribution will immediately (pending webhook execution) appear on the episode page for all to use/enjoy!
2. We routinely send thank you's on the air and on Twitter!
3. Give back to the awesome [Changelog Community](https://changelog.com/community) of hackers, podcast hosts, and guests!

## Conventions

### Directory structure and file names

Parsed and html-ized versions of these transcripts live on [Changelog.com](https://changelog.com) alongside their respective episode, which is accomplished by following this naming convention:

`[podcast-slug]/[hyphenized-podcast-name]-[episode-slug].md`

For example, [the episode that lives at](https://changelog.com/rfc/13): `https://changelog.com/rfc/13`

Has [its transcript in this repo at](https://github.com/thechangelog/transcripts/rfc/request-for-commits-13.md): `rfc/request-for-commits-13.md`

### Timestamps

Timestamps appear inline in front of the word/phrase they attach to. The preferred placement is at the beginning of a speaker's sentence/thought. Timestamps are delineated in the transcript by square brackets and HH:MM:SS.ms format. Because the text is in Markdown format, the square brackets must be escaped using a backslash `\` character. Example: `\[00:04:01.06\]`

The hour and sub-second sections are optional. This is another valid timestamp: `\[04:01\]`

## Conduct

[Contributor Code of Conduct](https://changelog.com/coc). By participating in this project you agree to abide by its terms.

## License & Copyright

[Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/). Copyright Changelog Media LLC.
